4 Exact Exponential Algorithms
In this section, we demonstrate the applicability of Theorem 1 to exact expo- nential algorithms. First, we consider the relation between the computational complexity of Knapsack and Subset Sum. It is trivial that any algorithm for Knapsack can be used for Subset Sum: Given an instance (U, ω, b) of Subset Sum, we can define t = b and ν(e) = ω(e) for every e ∈ U. Then the instance of Subset Sum is a Yes-instance if and only if the constructed instance of Knapsack is a Yes-instance. This can be decided by the assumed algorithm for Knapsack. We prove the converse relation below by applying Theorem 1.
Theorem 2. If there exists an algorithm that decides the Subset Sum problem in O∗(t(n)) time and O∗(s(n)) space, then there exists an algorithm that decides the Knapsack problem in O∗(t(n)) time and O∗(s(n)) space.
Proof. Consider a Knapsack instance, consisting of a universe U = {1, . . . , n}, weight functions ω,ν : U → {1,...,N}, and integers b,t. Now we apply Theo- rem 1 on both weight functions to obtain two sets Ωω , Ων . By considering the ele- ments of Ω := Ωω×Ων as quadruples, we obtain a set Ω of at most O(n2 lg2(nN)) quadruples (ωi, νi, bi, ti) such that for every X ⊆ U it holds that ν(X) ∈ [0, b] and ω(X) ∈ [t,nN] if and only if there exists an i such that νi(X) = bi and ωi(X) = ti. It remains to show that, for every quadruple (ωi, νi, bi, ti), we can determine whether there exists an X ⊆ U such that νi(X) = bi and ω(X) = ti. To do this, we create an instance of Subset Sum by concatenating the integer values. Specifically, given a quadruple (ωi, νi, bi, ti), define
αi(e)=νi(e)N(n+1)+ωi(e)foreverye∈U and ci =bi(n+1)N+ti.
It is easy to see that, since ωi(X) ≤ N(n+1), αi(X) = ci if and only if νi(X) = bi and ω(X) = ti. Then the assumed algorithm for Subset Sum can be used to decide for every quadruple (ωi, νi, bi, ti) whether there exists X ⊆ U such that αi(X) = ci. This in turn enables us to decide the Knapsack instance. The bound on the time and space complexity follows immediately from the fact that |Ω| is O(n2 lg2(nN)), which is polynomial in the size of the instance. ⊓⊔
As an easy corollary, we observe that we can apply binary search to even deal with the maximization variant of Knapsack.
  
Reducing a Target Interval to a Few Exact Queries 7
Corollary 1. There exists an algorithm that decides the Subset Sum problem in O∗(t(n)) time and O∗(s(n)) space if and only if there exists an algorithm that solves the Maximum Knapsack problem in O∗(t(n)) time and O∗(s(n)) space.
We can use the ideas in the proof of Theorem 2 to give another result on Knapsack. To this end, we assume that the given instance of Knapsack or Subset Sum is sparse, that is, the number of distinct sums in the instance is small. We recall a recent result of Kaski et al. [10].
Theorem 3 ([10]). There is an algorithm that decides an instance (U,ω,t) of Subset Sum in O∗(S) expected time and O∗(1) space, where S = |{ω(X) : X ⊆ U }|.
Using Theorem 1 and the ideas of Theorem 2, we can prove the following.
Theorem 4. There is an algorithm that decides an instance (U,ω,ν,t,b) of Knapsack in O∗(S) expected time and O∗(1) space, where S = |{(ω(X), ν(X)) : X ⊆ U}|.
To prove Theorem 4, we require the following auxiliary lemma.
Lemma 1. Let U be a set of n elements, let ω,ν : U → {1,...,N} be weight functions, let p ≥ 1 be an integer, and let ω ̃(e) = ⌊ω(e)/p⌋ and ν ̃(e) = ⌊ν(e)/p⌋ for every e ∈ U. Then
|{(ω ̃(X),ν ̃(X)):X ⊆U}|≤n2 ·|{(ω(X),ν(X)):X ⊆U}|.
Proof. For any pair of integers (x,y), consider the set Z = {X ⊆ U : ω(X) = x , ν ( X ) = y } . F o r e a c h X ∈ Z , w e h a v e t h a t ω ( X ) − n ≤ p · ω ̃ ( X ) ≤ ω ( X ) a n d ν(X) − n ≤ p · ν ̃(X) ≤ ν(X). Therefore, |{(ω ̃(X), ν ̃(X)) : X ∈ Z}| ≤ n2, and the lemma follows. ⊓⊔
Proof (of Theorem 4). We first apply the same construction as in the proof of Theorem 2 to obtain pairs (αi,ci). We then apply the algorithm of Theorem 3 on all of these pairs and return Yes if the algorithm finds an index i and a set X ⊆ U such that αi(X) = ci.
It remains to prove that this introduces at most a polynomial overhead. Since the number of pairs is bounded by a polynomial in the input length, it suffices to show that for every i, the quantity |{αi(X) : X ⊆ U}| is at most O∗(S). Observe that new weight functions are created in two places. First when Theorem 1 is invoked: note that in Algorithm 1, all created weight functions are effectively obtained by halving the weights x times and rounding down, which is equivalent to truncating the bitstring or dividing by 2x and rounding down. Hence, for all created weight functions ωi, we have that |{(ωi(X),νi(X)) : X ⊆ U}| ≤ n2 · S for every i by Lemma 1. The second place is when α is defined by concatenating the integers: then |{αi(X) : X ⊆ U}| = |{(ωi(X),νi(X)) : X ⊆ U}| ≤ n2 · S. Hence the overhead is at most polynomial. ⊓⊔

8 Jesper Nederlof, Erik Jan van Leeuwen, and Ruben van der Zwaan
